---
layout: post
title: "The quest for a perfect tuple: Prelude"
comments: true
tags: tuple metaprogramming
series: "The quest for a perfect tuple"
---

This post is a prelude to a series of posts I wish to write on an ambitious
subject; tuples. Some programming languages implement tuples at the language
level (Haskell, OCaml), while others implement them at the library level
(C#, D). In C++, tuples are implemented at the library level with types like
`std::tuple` or `boost::tuple`. You might not be aware of it, but the
implementation of tuples at the library level is an active area of research
for a number of (admittedly fairly niche) C++ library writers. My quest
in this series is to explore this area of C++, and to make a complete survey
of existing techniques.

{% include series.html %}

At its heart, a tuple is a very simple thing. However, as we will see throughout
this series, different implementations can vary wildly in both complexity and
quality. But what criteria can be used to judge whether a tuple implementation
is good? What makes a tuple better than another? Unless you already know the
answer, this might not be obvious.

## Compile-time efficiency
Since we're implementing tuple as a library type, each time a new tuple type
is created, the compiler has to do some work to "create" that type. This
process is called template instantiation in the lingo, and it can sometimes
be quite expensive in terms of compile-time. While this might not be such a
large problem for application developers, tuples are our most basic tool for
metaprogramming. Hence, there is a large class of libraries that are built on
top of tuples, or that at least use them internally (sometimes quite intensively).
If our tuple doesn't scale at compile-time, these libraries become less usable
for end users, and we're toast. Hence, a good tuple should be nice with the
compiler and be cheap to instantiate.

Apart from the simple cost of creating a tuple, we'll also want operations on
tuples to be cheap. In particular, since this is a very basic operation, we'll
want to be able to get the n-th element of a tuple with as little compile-time
overhead as possible.

## Runtime efficiency
If we want tuples to be truly useful, it should be possible to use them both
in performance-critical code and elsewhere. This is especially true when
considering the argument used above; it should be possible for
performance-critical libraries to be built on top of tuples, which is only
possible if tuples are efficient. Also, since a tuple is in essence just a
`struct`, it would only be reasonable to ask that it has a runtime efficiency
comparable to that of a hand-written `struct`. Hence, for example, it would be
completely nuts to have a tuple that needs to allocate.

Another very important aspect of this is the ability for the compiler to
optimize code manipulating tuples. It is one thing to provide an implementation
that is _theoretically_ perfect, but if it causes the compiler to generate
crappy code because of some reason, that implementation is unfortunately
not a good choice for real world programming. Of course, a bug should
probably also be filed against the compiler.


## Other goodies
The above points are really, really important. However, there are other
goals that a good tuple implementation should ideally meet.

###  Compression of empty objects
A nice feature to have from a tuple implementation is the ability not to
store anything for empty objects. Indeed, using some metaprogramming tricks,
it is sometimes possible to implement a tuple in which empty objects do not
take up any space. This is a nice space optimization that not all tuple
implementations can provide with ease.

### `constexpr`-friendliness
Ideally, we'd like to be able to use tuples inside constant expressions.
This restricts the operations that we can use inside an implementation,
since we must stay `constexpr`-friendly. This is not the most important
point, since anything written with `constexpr` can be done at the type-
level, and chances are that you don't need your tuples to be `constexpr`
as much as you think. However, this is still a nice-to-have.

### <strike>Compatibility with std::tuple</strike>
Among the above points, you might notice that _being compatible with the
interface of `std::tuple`_ was omitted. Indeed, `std::tuple` is a huge beast,
and implementing it correctly is almost impossible. But worse, doing so in a
compile-time efficient way is totally out of question; there's just too
much metaprogramming involved. Its 18 constructors (no shit!) require the
whole world to be instantiated and some complex SFINAE to be evaluated, which
makes the compiler go crazy.

For this reason, I would generally discourage the author of a core library to
use `std::tuple` as a building block. Since this series is largely targeted
towards library writers, I will not consider being compatible with `std::tuple`
a goal that we should strive to meet _in this series_. Also note that the vast
majority of the time, you would get away with a tuple having a much smaller
interface, so sticking to `std::tuple` is by no means a _must have_.

## Conclusion

By now, you should hopefully have a feel for what are the challenges of
designing a good tuple implementation, and why we might want to explore
many different implementations. The next few posts in this series will
introduce different implementation techniques, and finally we'll benchmark
all the techniques that have been presented in a sort
of tuple-implementation-shootout. Stay tuned!
